Let's create our first
Fortran programme.
It will be a very simple one.
It will just print,
hello_world to standard output
so that it shows
up in the terminal.
A Fortran programme
is just a text file.
So you can use any
text editor you like.
I'm going to use
vim because that's
the one I'm most familiar with.
So the name of the file is
going to be hello_world.f90.
Don't worry, I'm not going
to type all the time.
I'm just doing this once.
So each Fortran application
has one and only
one compilation unit program.
So that's what we start with.
The name of that compilation
unit is hello_world.
It need not be identical
to the file name.
But of course, it's a
bit neater if it is.
So we end that compilation
unit with end programm
And just for good measure, we
add the name of the compilation
unit, so hello_world.
Now we add a single
print statement.
First, we have to specify
some formatting information.
I'm just going to use the
default, which is an asterisk.
No worries, we will
come back to that later.
And then the string
which we want to print.
In this case, just
'hello world'.
And I'm using single quotes
to delimit the string.
I could use double quotes.
You can do whatever
you like both work.
It's up to you.
I'm going to save the
file and quit the editor.
And now I can compile
the code and link it
into an application.
I'm going to use a
gfortran compiler.
The name of the executable is
going to be hello_world.exe.
And the name of the file
which I want to compile is
hello_world.f90.
We can execute that.
And you see that hello
world is printed.
We can improve the source code a
little bit by making the string
into a variable.
Because actually, it will
be the same every time.
So that would be a
variable of type character.
And we have to specify
a length for that.
That length should be
at least the number
of characters in the string.
But it can be more.
So just to be on the
safe side, let's say 20.
That should do fine.
And then, of course, we
have a variable message
which we assign our string to.
And now we can simply
use the variable,
which we just defined, in
order to use the value.
Nothing special here.
So we save this.
And we compile it again.
So gfortran -o hello_world.exe
hello_world.f90.
That went fine.
We run the application.
And of course, we get the
expected result. Or not.
This is odd.
So something went wrong.
Probably, you already
saw what the problem is.
But let's solve it in
a more structured way.
So one of the things which is
very good practise in Fortran
is to declare explicitly
that all variables
in your programme, in
your computation unit,
need to be declared.
And that can be done by
starting the compilation
unit with implicit none.
We save the file.
And we compile it again.
And then you see that we
get a compilation error.
And actually learning to
interpret compilation errors
is an important part of learning
a new programming language.
So the error says, symbol
massage at the location
has no implicit type.
And it even goes a bit further.
Compiler says, OK, did
you actually mean message?
And indeed, that was the plan.
So let's go back to the editor
and actually fix our problem.
And save the file again.
And when we compile,
now everything is fine.
When we run, we get
the expected result.
So we've just created our very
first Fortran application.
Time to move on to
more interesting stuff.